I miss Matt mentioned I've had the
privilege to work on a number of
different media technology projects over
the years everything from building
exhibits at the National Constitution
Center in Philadelphia
due to creating dome film experiences
and data visualization experiences and
interactive experiences and and as Matt
mentioned I also got to work with write
Kurzweil for about 10 years
on a number of different projects and my
job today is that I am now the director
of the emerging media lab at the
Institute for the future and I'll tell
you a little bit more about that in a
minute so just a little bit of
background on myself
I'm the child of two artists my mom is
actually sitting here in the second row
she's an artist cause to her here's to
mom and I was exposed to art very early
in my career and my father was a
photographer so from the earliest age I
was playing with cameras and from that
I've really developed a love of light
and that's a theme that goes through all
of my work another thing that you'll see
in my work is collaboration I really
like to work with groups and other folks
and another theme also is a mythology I
don't have enough time to go as deep as
I'd like to and today but the hero's
journey is often a story framework that
I work into a lot of my work in short
kind of this concept of starting in the
ordinary world journeying into a special
world to where some sort of power or
object is received and returning back
into the ordinary world and I think you
know just one comment on that as I I've
often noticed that I feel like here in
the Bay Area we're really good at taking
people through the first two acts but we
often struggle with taking people back
home how do we take them from that
magical world and help them bring it
into relevance into their normal life
it's much less sexy but very very
important I'm often asked what do I
actually sell or create and I would say
my main product is Wonder
not really white bread style but I like
to think of wonder as motivated
curiosity so I can always tell that I
always feel that I've been successful
when people leave the experiences that
I've helped create with the sense that
life is a little bit more magical than
they thought so I'm going to start with
first with some of my personal projects
before the Institute and it's a career
of about 20 years as an independent
designer and producer and strategist and
I got to do a lot of fun stuff a recent
project that I worked on was a project
called evolution of fire as a motion
light painting project has done in -
2015 my collaborator my main
collaborator on that was Eric Freeman a
photographer who's also a musician who
goes by the title elder flux Eric and I
have a kind of informal Club we call the
epic dirty Club where we go to beautiful
places and take very strange camera
systems there and play around with them
but at that time we were playing a lot
with light painting and specifically
using fiber-optic brushes to get very
more organic style light painting and it
was just for fun and we ended up getting
invited to the autumn Lights Festival in
Oakland if you haven't attended it's a
fantastic festival that happens in in
August and we did a bunch of light
paintings just playing around but then
from that a local startup here called
Firefly they make vaporizers asked us to
do some product shots so we had we
started getting a little more serious
than that and those are pretty
successful so then we moved on - they
actually asked us to create a small
campaign for them so we decided to
develop a stop-motion project based on
this light painting and that project was
called evolution of fire
here's the result of it I'm going to
talk over it there's a lot going on but
basically what you're about to see is
stop-motion animation and we used a
robotic camera rail system so it's
actually a performance for photographic
performance piece because we have eight
seconds between each sought to reset and
this was done with six different artists
it's running around together
of course the hardest thing in
stop-motion animation is only making
small there changes in between each
frame which is quite difficult when you
have to do it in eight seconds
[Music]
and just move on from that another
personal project I want to share is a
project called prototype Oh exploring
topography through structured light this
was also done in 2015 it was inspired by
my visit to instant which is my other
favorite art and Technology conference
that takes place well normally that year
was in in Minneapolis and now takes
place in New Orleans but if you haven't
been or don't know about it I highly
recommend looking into it
really inspiring similar to this getting
to meet a lot of artists but I was
particularly taken by the artists that
didn't just show their end products
which showed all the prototyping that
they did and it really got me inspired
to do more prototyping it's also really
excited that year because the sony MPC
lo1 came out this is one of the first
laser projector systems it was a pico
projector it's about the size of a
cigarette pack but what's special about
it is actually it's it's a laser
projector inside of that to RGB scanning
laser and it actually works very similar
to a CRT and that it's being drawn as a
raster scan by the laser line going
horizontally and what's really special
with that especially for projection
mapping is that because there's no lens
involved basically of infinite focus so
for wrapping around contours you don't
to worry about any focus issues it's
also very small and portable it was
great for tabletops I'll size up a
prototyping sorry inspire base some of
these other projection mapping artists
here and at the time is also working a
lot with structured light camera systems
for my day jobs so something like a
Kinect and it's really taken by the
actually the aesthetics of the structure
of light itself and for those who are
familiar with structured light basically
if you look on the right here you
basically project an own pattern onto a
contoured surface and then you're able
to by seeing the distortion in that
known pattern that structured light
you're able to figure out the depth and
the topography which allows you to get
3d imagery something like this and our
eyes work in a similar way if you look
at my arm here you can see the
contouring here you know that it should
be a flat light and you interpret that
as depth so I wanted to play with this
idea of exploring
on contour and topography through
structured light patterns so this is one
of the first experiments I did just with
some fabric with one of my longtime
collaborators and my my life partner as
well Eliza bender we're just playing
with some fabric here but it's just
early tasks to see how effect it was and
we're really excited it worked out
really well you can see it's creating
really complex contours in your eye very
quickly is trying to make sense of that
this is another early test that we did
the size of the projector it made
allowed us to work very very small scale
and you have to worry about focal
distances then we said then we moved on
to doing an installation a light art
installation where you could actually go
inside the fabric and dance around and
then started collaborating with a number
of different Bay Area artists some of
whom are in the audience today but just
an excuse to hang out and play with
light with folks this was a
collaboration with some other
photographers and filmmakers we were
actually using two projectors for this
shoot this was a special opportunity
monument another artist collected here
had a surrealist potluck so we brought
the projector and a mist maker and it
created kind of volumetric light we
offered a light meal for anybody that
wanted to have a snack this is a
movement artist andrea dragon this is
with a fashion photographer and model
and stylist scott kildall who's here in
the third row and also an amazing artist
who's shown here this was some of his
work that we started integrating in so
now we're adding movement to the
structured light so adding even more
layers
and this was with the commercial
photographer eagle Oh sir who lives in
the East Bay and an amazing designer and
painter friend of ours in Vallejo for
Brava and this is some work with a mad
scientist friend of ours Brian Pinkham
who lives in Berkeley we started getting
into some really trippy stuff here
projecting faces on faces and bodies on
bodies Pinkham how do you know which way
is up in which way is down I'm not quite
sure anymore it's quite disorienting
anyway as you can see we had a lot of
fun this was our last collaboration we
decided to cap it at 12 this was wood
actually this was one of the artists
that wouldn't had inspired us to work on
this Leslie Benson who lives in Santa
Cruz she's an incredible paper artist
she creates all these pieces that she
makes out of a single sheet of paper
folded and cut and she's also a fashion
designer so we did a shoot with her it
was kind of our final graduation what
shoot we shot a bunch of video too so a
little bit compressed but you can get a
sense of how it moves and then with my
VJ roots I started taking some that
footage just to remix and make some fun
DJ clips as well so that's basically a
quick overview a couple of my past
personal projects my largest project now
as Matt mentioned is I is now the
biggest project I've ever done
working at the emerging Media Lab and
actually forming the emerging media lab
at the Institute for the future the
Institute for the future is a real place
you can go and visit it's in Palo Alto
California and if you go into the
basement that's where the emerging Media
Lab is the Institute was founded in 1968
so it's the larger the longest-running
organization I believe in the world and
it's an incredible group of researchers
and futurists I'm not sure if I'm a
futurist yet I'm going to borrow from my
friend Tony who says I'm future curious
which I like but yeah so last year just
around this time we started the
beginnings which what has become the
emerging media of the emergence of the
emerging media lab at the lab are we do
kind of three areas of focus
we're tracking proliferation of media
technologies oh and I forgot to mention
on earlier slide but really what we're
focusing on is experiential
communication platforms so right now
that really means a lot of virtual
reality mixed reality and augmented
reality technologies but specifically in
the service of can be human
communication so we're tracking
proliferation of these technologies like
you know what's new what's available
we're hacking applications we're seeing
what they're supposed to be good for and
then we're kind of coming up with new
uses for these things and then unpacking
implications is kind of larger mission
of the Institute so what does this mean
and that's where my collaboration with
the rest of the researchers at the
Institute really comes into effect and
the work that we're doing there is
basically R&D we're doing a lot of
prototyping projects we're doing some
custom client projects as well as
serving as a basically an experiential
communication ARMA for the Institute for
the other research groups so not just
studying virtual reality but actually
using virtual reality technologies to
communicate speculative design concepts
from the other it's from the other
research groups so I'm going to share a
couple projects that we've worked on
just in this first year the first
project is a project called emergence
it's a virtual reality music composition
and performance this was done last
summer it was part of a event that has
now become a series at the Institute
called reality mixers where I bring in
artists and performers who are using
virtual reality or other emerging
technologies in their performances and
super fun
but this performance was actually a
combination of four elements we put
together a performance system based on
oculus dk2
we attached a leap motion hand tracker
to the front of the headset and then we
worked with some software specifically
written for that hardware configuration
called library R it was really awful a
software so it was had a lot of rough
edges but were sometimes you find that
working with constraints and issues
actually brings out some new types of
creativity and then of course the fourth
component to the system was the human
performer and I brought in a dear friend
of mine who have done a number of
projects with over the years Daniel
Berkman who's an amazing composer and
multi-instrumentalist and he works with
everything from baroque instruments like
the viola da gamba all the way up to
looping and whatnot but he had never
done a virtual reality they never even
done any virtual reality before so this
was his first experience and that's
something that we like to do at the
Institute one of the things we say is
that artists are natural futurists a lot
of our clients are you know they're
basically fortune 100 companies in very
large not governmental organizations and
you know big organizations tend to think
about measurement how do we measure what
we've done what has happened and how do
we project out you know what we're going
to do and scale that out but of course
the future cannot be measured and
especially an increasingly disruptive
times it's really hard to anticipate the
future based on what's happened in the
past so that's where imagination and the
the role the artist really comes into
play so the performance which I'm going
to play a little clip from is basically
it's a seven-minute performance and I do
it it's kind of an edutainment
experience for our research clients it's
fun that's interesting it's engaging it
also helps them understand that these VR
right now a lot of people look at it and
say oh it's a toy it's a game it's a
kind of movie that wraps around my head
and really what we're trying to reduce
is concept that this is a new form of
interface and it's really these are new
computing platforms just so to see human
expressing themselves artistically and
creatively in that it really helps to
make that point for them
so I'm going to play a clip from that
now it's just a short clip if you want
to see the whole thing it's on they me
on my video site
[Music]
so if you go to my website toshu calm
you can see the whole thing the next
project that worked on at the Institute
was a project called labyrinth it's a
mixed reality delivery portal basically
what that was was one of the other one
of the largest research groups at the
Institute is called tech horizons we're
not all not all the research groups are
technology-based we have a future food
feature of health feature of governments
this happened to be one of the
technology focused research groups and
their theme that year was when
everything is media so it was actually a
perfect time to integrate in the
emerging Media Lab this is their annual
research report it's really more of a
graphic novel and kind of boring
research report it's it's pretty amazing
publication and they wanted to they
asked me is there a way that we could
present this to our clients it's a
printed book essentially in a way that
would be something unique and memorable
so we thought about it and especially
since they're really they were talking
and thinking a lot about ambient and
immersive communications we decided to
create a virtual reality well it's
really a mixed reality experience and
for that I brought in my my girlfriend
and longtime collaborator Liza who's a
who's also not a technology based artist
she's a designer environmental designer
and a painter and a collage artist and I
basically had her we set up a tilt brush
set up in the lab and we made an
extra-large capture zone so if you're
not familiar with tilt brush it's a 3d
painting program and we set up and
typically a vive setup captures out is
about 12 foot by 12 foot but we added
some extra cables and we extended it out
to about 20 feet by 20 feet to make an
area that someone could could walk
around and we created a labyrinth the
spiral labyrinth that basically people
were able to enter into and walk around
in a spiral in virtual reality and a
hand-painted scene and then enter into
an inner chamber where they would
actually see a virtual copy of future
now floating in front of them
then we were they didn't have any
headphones on we could hear you in the
room so we encourage them to reach
forward and grab and actually we'd put
you'll see in the video we had placed a
real copy and that's how you'd received
your research report so this is an
overview of the whole model for most of
our clients
[Music]
so we had some cables on the floor and
we placed some flames on the ground that
people dissever were some people were
more coordinated with investors that was
the mixed reality element basically
mixed realities when we go time physical
reality with Richard we even had a fan
you can see they're blowing up simulate
the particle effects that are coming
[Music]
[Laughter]
one of the best things about my job is
putting people through virtuality
specifically tail brush for the first
time and just seeing them take the
headset off and just seeing that like
childlike joy the sense of wonder that
it's just amazing
Thanks
and Eliza is here the audience is
filming over there a couple more
projects I'm very excited to share this
project we just launched it literally
two days ago here at our largest
research conference of the year which is
our ten year forecast gathering it's
about 200 people gathering together we
have it's a and every year we pick a
different theme for our 10 year forecast
this year the theme was geographies of
transition in the next 10 years
how are the maps of our world going to
transform and how do you continue to
navigate as those maps reconfigure and
dissolve so one of the themes that kind
of came out that came out of this year
was this idea of designing for
impermanence just assuming that things
are going to be changing and so we
decided to hold the conference this year
on the USS Hornet which is in Alameda
it's a decommissioned aircraft carrier
which now is an aerospace museum so it's
full of crazy cool airplanes helicopters
and spaceships really great spot for us
and when we got to we do the site visit
we discovered that the way you get your
equipment and onto the ship is this
crazy crane of the shipping containers
on to the deck and the director of the
program Dylan Hendricks a good friend of
mine said you know isn't this shipping
container exact about the size of a
virtual reality capture zone could we
put a VR system inside a shipping
container and it just things grew from
there
and we basically realized we did some
testing actually just about the right
size
and that's when sim Tanner was born so
the concept here again was you know we
think looking at kind of designing for
impermanence and reconfigurable
architecture and it was also happened to
be taking place right next to the Port
of Oakland where containerization kind
of exploded in the same year our
Institute was was created in 1968 so
there's all these threads that work that
were gathered through so
with the director and one of my research
managers who knows unity we created SEM
Taner which was a virtuality experience
inside of a ship in Canada and this is a
panorama of the quarry so you can see
Matt gana Chou right there that's me and
yeah we weren't sure how I was going to
work out we didn't really get to test it
in a real container until the day before
and it was a huge success we see this as
a platform that we're going to continue
developing for and I'll talk you through
the experience as the video plays let's
see here
so we're taught we were looking at three
forms of reuses of shipping containers
we first go in the experience you're
actually inside another shipping
container in virtual reality but from
there you go into a micro clinic and we
partnered with organizations that are
actually building out these projects the
second location was a micro home you can
actually see at the end of the the
clinic you you're told to sit on a stool
and then you end up sitting on the
toilet in the house
a mixed reality transition in our
research around micro home is one of the
interesting things we realized is that
there's really two categories of micro
housing one is is for disaster relief
and refugee housing and the other
category is really luxury retreat homes
so and they're not that different in
their design it really just depends on
where they're they're placed are you in
the middle of a refugee camp or are you
you know up in Tahoe in front of a lake
the last location was a micro farm which
is based on existing designs that are
happening now oh here's Matt gana Xiao
testing and ask sorry Matt I had to put
you there I don't know if he knew I did
that I was cheating oh of course we
added the googly eyes which humanizes a
little bit anyway so that's the cemetery
and we're excited to continue building
this out and scaling it out and creating
more experiences there a couple really
quick more projects body world's a ours
is a private project we're doing for the
tech museum if you're not familiar with
Body Worlds it's an incredible traveling
exhibit that's basically plastinated
human bodies created by this guy crazy
German gone through
Hagen figured out how to plastun a
teaming tissue essentially so we're
working with the tech museum is about to
host it starting in october to create an
augmented reality exhibit that wraps
around the physical exhibit and we're
doing that using the tango phones that
are coming out of this is called the fab
2 pro so it's going to be a handheld
augmented reality exhibit and that'll be
launching in October and I'm super
excited because actually in order to
create that we're creating a whole a are
authoring platform called artifact er
that's going to allow us to basically
place augmented reality exhibits
anywhere part of what we've realized
through working with the museum is that
essentially a museum is like a
collection of stuff with like annotation
or additional information and through
augmented Rallye the whole world can
become a museum so we're looking excited
to create that out with my lead
developer and then the last project is
we're about to embark on a trip to China
and this is NASA graphic study of VR
Street culture there's a whole bunch of
because of limited space in homes in
China most of virtuality is actually
happening in public arcades and malls
and whatnot so we're going to be doing a
little film study of that anyway that's
my talk and very excited to be here and
thank you for listening
[Applause]